I'm a man who's trying to live from his
heart and so just before I get going I
wanted to tell you as a South African
that one of the men who has inspired me
most passed away a few hours ago Nelson
Mandela has come to the end of his long
walk to freedom and so this talk is
going to be for him I grew up in wonder
I grew up amongst those animals I grew
up in the wild eastern part of South
Africa at a place called LAN deluzy Game
Reserve it's a place where my family has
been in the safari business for four
generations now for as long as I can
remember my job has been to take people
out into nature and so I think it's a
lovely twist of fate today to have the
opportunity to bring some of my
experiences out in nature into this
gathering and you know Africa is a place
where people still sit under starlit
skies and around campfires and tell
stories and so what I have to share with
you today is the simple medicine of a
few campfire stories stories about
heroes of heart now my stories are not
the stories that you'll hear on the news
and while it's true that Africa is a
harsh place I also know it to be a place
that's people animals and ecosystems
teach us about a more interconnected
world when I was nine years old
President Mandela came to stay with my
family he had just been released from
his 27 years of incarceration and was in
a period of readjustment to his sudden
global icon status members of his the
African National Congress thought that
in the bush
he would have time to rest and
recuperate away from the public eye and
it's true that lions tend to be a very
good deterrent to proof and paparazzi
but it was a defining time for me as a
young boy I would take him breakfast in
bed and then in an old tracksuit and
slippers he would go for a walk around
the garden at night I would sit with my
family around the snowy bunny ear TV and
watch images of that same quiet man from
the garden surrounded by hundreds and
thousands of people as scenes from his
release for broadcast nightly he was
bringing peace to a divided and violent
South Africa one man with an
unbelievable sense of his humanity
Mandela said often that the gift of
prison was the ability to go within and
to think to create in himself the things
he most wanted for South Africa peace
reconciliation harmony through this act
of immense open heartedness he was to
become the embodiment of what in South
Africa we call Ubuntu Ubuntu I am
because of you or people are not people
without other people it's not a new idea
or value but it's one that I certainly
think at these times is worth building
on in fact it is said that in the
collective consciousness of Africa we
get to experience the deepest parts of
our own humanity through our
interactions with others Ubuntu is at
play right now you are holding a space
for me to express the deepest truth of
Who I am without you I'm just a guy
talking to an empty room
and I spent a lot of time last week
doing that and it still it's not the
same as this
if Mandela was the national and
international embodiment then the man
who taught me the most about this value
personally was this man saw Liam Longo
Sully was born under a tree 60
kilometers from where I grew up in
Mozambique he would never have a lot of
money but he was to be one of the
richest men I would ever meet Sully grew
up tending to his father's cattle
now I can tell you I don't know what it
is about people who grow up looking
after cattle but it makes for uber
resourcefulness the first job that he
ever got in the Safari business was
fixing the Safari tracks where he had
learned to do that out in the bush I
have no idea but he could do it he then
moved across into what we called the
habitat team these were the people on
the reserve who were responsible for its
well-being he fixed roads he mended
wetlands he did some anti poaching and
then one day we were out together and he
came across the tracks of where a female
leopard had walked and it was an old
track but for fun he turned and he began
to follow and I tell you I could tell by
the speed at which he moved on those peg
marks that this man was a PhD level
tracker if you drove past Sully
somewhere out on the reserve you look up
in your rearview mirror you see he
stopped the car 20 50 meters down the
road just in case you need help with
something
the only accusation I ever heard
levelled at him was when one of our
clients said Sully
you are pathologically helpful when I
started professionally guiding people
out into this environment Sully was my
tracker we worked together as a team and
the first guests we ever got were a
philanthropy group from your East Coast
and they said to Sully on the side I
said before we even got to see lions and
leopards we want to see where you live
so we took them up to his house and this
visit of the philanthropist to his house
coincided with a time when Sully's wife
who was learning English was going
through a phase where she would open the
door by saying hello I love you welcome
I love you and and there was something
so beautifully African about it to me
the small house with a huge heart in it
now on the day that Sully saved my life
he was already my hero it was a hot day
and we found ourselves down by the river
because of the heat I took my shoes off
and I rolled up my pants and I walked
into the water slowly remained on the
bank the water was clear running over
sand
and we turned and we began to make our
way upstream and a few meters ahead of
us there was a place where a tree had
fallen out of the bank and its branches
were touching the water and it was
shadowy and if it had been a horror
movie people in the audience would have
started saying don't go in there don't
go in there and of course the crocodile
was in the shadows now the first thing
that you notice when a crocodile hits
you is the ferocity of the bat Wham it
hits me by my right leg it pulls me it
turns I throw my hand up I'm able to
grab a branch it's shaking me violently
it's a very strange sensation having
another creature try and eat you and
there are a few things that promote
vegetarianism like that
Solly on the bank sees that I'm in
trouble he turns he begins to make his
way to me
the croc again continues to shake me it
goes to bite me a second time I notice a
slick of blood in the water around me
that gets washed downstream as it bites
the second time I kick my foot goes down
its throat it splits me out I pull
myself up into the branches and as I
come out of the water I look over my
shoulder my leg from the knee down is
mangled beyond description
the bone is cracked the meat is torn up
I make an instant decision that I'll
never look at that again as I come out
the water
Solly arrives at a deep section a
channel between us he knows he sees the
state of my leg he knows that between
him and I there is a crocodile and I can
tell you this man doesn't slow down for
one second he comes straight into the
channel he wades into above his waist he
gets to me he grabs me I'm still in a
vulnerable position he picks me up and
puts me on his shoulder this is the
other thing about Sully's freakishly
strong he turns he walks me up the bank
he lays me down he pulls his shirt off
he wraps it around my leg picks me up a
second time walks me to a vehicle and
he's able to get me to medical attention
and I survive
now now I don't know how many people you
know that go into a deep channel of
water that they know has a crocodile in
it to come and help you
but for Sully it was as natural as
breathing and he is one amazing example
of what I have experienced all over
Africa in a more collective society we
realize from the inside that our own
well-being is deeply tied to the
well-being of others dangerous shared
pain is shared joy is shared achievement
is shared houses are shared food is
shared
well bun 2 asks us to open our hearts
and to share and what Sully taught me
that day is the essence of this value is
animated empathetic action in every
moment now though the root word is about
people I thought that maybe it went to
was only about people and then I met
this young lady her name was Elvis
in fact Sully gave her the name Elvis
because he said she walked like she was
doing that Elvis the pelvis dance she
was born with very badly deformed back
legs and pelvis she arrived at our
reserve from a reserve east of us on her
migratory route when I first saw her I
thought she would be dead in a matter of
days and yet for the next five years she
returned in the winter months and we
would be so excited to be out in the
bush and to come across this unusual
track it looked like an inverted bracket
and we would drop whatever we were doing
and we would follow and then we would
come around the corner and there she
would be with her herd and the
outpouring of emotion from people on our
safari trucks as they saw her it was the
sense of kinship and it reminded me that
even people who grow up in cities feel a
natural connection with the natural
world and with animals and yet still I
remained amazed that she was surviving
and then one day we came across them at
this small waterhole it was sort of a
hollow in the ground
and I watched as the matriarch drank and
then she turned in that beautiful slow
motion of elephants
looks like the arm in motion and she
began to make her way up the steep Bank
the rest of the herd turned and began to
follow and I watched young Elvis begin
to psych herself up for the hill
she got visibly hip ears came forward
she had a full guard and halfway up her
legs gave way and she fell backwards she
attempted it a second time and again
halfway up she fell backwards and on the
third attempt an amazing thing happened
halfway up the bank a young teenage
elephant came in behind her and he
propped his trunk underneath her and he
began to shovel her up the bank and it
occurred to me that the rest of the herd
was in fact looking after this young
elephant the next day I watched again as
the matriarch broke a branch and she
would put it in her mouth and then she
would break a second one and drop it on
the ground and a consensus developed
between all of us who were guiding
people in that area that that herd was
in fact moving slower to accommodate
that elephant what Elvis and the herd
taught me caused me to expand my
definition of a Bunty and I believe that
in the cathedral of the wild we get to
see the most beautiful parts of
ourselves reflected back at us and it is
not only through other people that we
get to experience our humanity but
through all the creatures that live on
this planet
if Africa has a gift to share it's a
gift of a more collective society and
while it's true that a bunt too is an
African idea what I see is the essence
of that value being invented here thank
you
the boy we know that you were you that
you knew President Mandela from early
childhood and that you heard the news as
we all did today and deeply distraught
and and know the tragic loss that it is
to the world but just wondered if you
wanted to share any additional thoughts
because we know that you heard that news
just before coming in to do this session
yeah thanks Pat well I'm so happy
because it was time for him to pass on
he was suffering and so of course it is
the mixed emotions but I just think of
so many occurrences like the time he
went on The Oprah Show and asked her
what the show would be about she was
like well it'll be about you I mean
that's that's just incredible humility
he was the father of our nation and
we've got a we've got a road to walk in
South Africa and everything they used to
call it Madiba magic you know he used to
go to a rugby match and we would win
anyway he went things went well but I
think that magic will be with us and the
important thing is that we carry what he
stood for and so that's what I'm gonna
try and do and that's what people all
over South Africa are trying to do and
that's what you've done today oh thank
you thank you thank you
[Applause]